# Maisy Dodge 

# Hampton Court Palace ‘Place Essay’

## Overview
	Building of the palace began in 1515 for Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, a favourite of King Henry VIII. Essentially, Henry relied on Wolsey to rule for him during the first years of his reign. In 1529 when Wolsey refused to divorce Henry and his first wife, Catherine, the King seized the palace for himself and later enlarged it. Along with St James's Palace, Hampton Court Palace is one of only two surviving palaces out of the many owned by King Henry VIII. Two years later, Wolsey died. In the following century, King William III destroyed a lot of the Tudor Palace during his massive rebuilding and expansion project. Work ceased in 1694, leaving the palace in two distinct contrasting architectural styles, Tudor and Baroque. King George II was the last monarch to reside in the palace. 
	
## Base Court
	The Base Court was Wolsey’s creation, and is the first court after visitors walk through the main entrance. Above the archway is an oriel window with a panel of Henry VIII’s arms, as well as a clock brought by William IV from St James's Palace. The Base Court is surrounded on the north, south and west sides by Wolsey's two-storey battlemented lodgings ranges. The Base Court contained forty-four lodgings reserved for guests, while the second court (today, Clock Court) contained the very best rooms – the state apartments – reserved for the King and his family. Henry VIII stayed in the state apartments as Wolsey's guest immediately after their completion in 1525. 

## Great Hall
	Between 1532 and 1535, Henry added the Great Hall, which happens to be the last medieval great hall built for the English monarchy. The Great Hall has a carved hammer-beam roof. During Tudor times, this was the most important room of the palace; here, the King would dine seated at a table upon a raised platform. The hall took five years to complete; the King got so impatient waiting for completion that the masons were compelled to work throughout the night by candlelight.

## Great Fountain Garden
	The grounds as they appear today were laid out in grand style in the late 17th century. There are no authentic remains of Henry VIII's gardens. Today, the dominating feature of the grounds is the great landscaping scheme constructed for Sir Christopher Wren's intended new palace - Sir Christopher Wren being the architect for William III and Mary II’s rebuilding project. As you can see, there is a semicircular formal garden surrounded by water and three avenues radiating out in a crow's foot pattern. The central avenue contains not a walk or a drive, but the great canal known as the Long Water, which was excavated during the reign of Charles II in 1662.

## Wolsey Closet
	Wolsey spent lavishly (200,000 Crowns) to build the finest palace in England at Hampton Court. Today, little of Wolsey's building work remains unchanged. Wolsey's Closet is now the solitary survivor of Cardinal Wolsey's personal apartments. It is situated in the range of buildings east of Clock Court. It was Henry VIII who ordered the painted panels that are still a part of the interior. A small door leads into a minor room which is believed to have been used as a wardrobe for the Cardinal. The highly ornate ceiling has Tudor roses and the Prince of Wales feathers, under which can be seen Wolsey's motto, which translates to “The Lord my helper” A fireplace had been installed which could be a sign that the Cardinal spent quite a lot of time in this room.

## Privy Garden
	On the south side of the palace is the Privy Garden bounded by semi-circular wrought iron gates. This garden, originally William III's private garden, was replanted in 1992 in period style with manicured hollies and yews along a geometric system of paths. Using incredibly detailed accounts, the garden has been restored to how it would have looked for William III in 1702. It contains 12 elaborate panels whose central motifs symbolise parts of the United Kingdom in wrought iron. The Privy Garden at Hampton Court is one of the most accurately reconstructed gardens because so much was recorded about the original 1702 garden. William III died before it was completely finished which meant all the gardeners and workmen were frightened of not being paid. This is why they submitted the fullest possible accounts of their work, and thus why we have such detailed records. 
